Now with that however, let's go back to a project and I prepared a basic project which you as always
find attached,
it's actually my snapshot of that project's project
we worked on where we can move projects between two boxes but it's also these events.html
file, the events.css file and events.js file
and these are the files we'll start working on,
so make sure you double click on that events.html file in the Windows Explorer or the Mac finder
to open that because that will give us such a nice button and a couple of other elements which we can
use to start diving into event objects and into events in Javascript in general.
So we get this nice button and if we click it, it doesn't do anything because I haven't added any event
listeners.
Now you learned how you can add an event listener to a button,
you first of all select the button, for example with query selector or with get element by ID and then
you can use the add event listener method which exists on any DOM node basically to attach an event
to it.
Now that is always something you can do
but before we do it like this,
let me also show you two other ways of adding events.
One is a way that is pretty old and which you shouldn't use anymore, still for completeness sake,
I want to show it to you.
You can go right to the HTML node in your HTML code and on there, you can add an attribute, on click and
this is not an arbitrary name chosen by me,
there are various on attributes for different events
this element supports.
So for a button, we've got a lot of those - on blur, on click, on double click, on context menu which is a
right click, on drag, various drag events which I'll dive into later and so on, so a lot of events
we can use there.
Now I'm interested in on click here
and then as a value, you assign some Javascript code which should execute when this event here happens,
so for example here we could throw an alert and say hello there and this would be valid Javascript code,
here
you could also execute a function which is defined in your events.js file if you wanted to or just
write some inline Javascript code as I'm doing it here
and with that if you then reload this page and you click here, you see this alert. Now it's strongly discouraged
that you use this approach,
it makes your project very hard to maintain,
it's completely unexpected that we suddenly find Javascript code in our HTML code, especially when
we have separate Javascript files and it just makes working on your project, especially on bigger projects
much much harder,
so don't mix
HTML and HTML attributes and Javascript code, it's absolutely not a recommended practice.
We should register events in our Javascript file instead,
so here in the events.js file which is getting imported here in the events.html file,
we can get started by selecting our button, for example with document query selector button like this.
Now we have access to the first button we find, which in this case is the only button I have on the page
and now instead of add event listener which you of course can use and which you actually should use, we
also have another way of adding an event,
it's pretty close to what we did here in HTML,
just this time in Javascript,
we can set a value to the on click property, so this on click attribute which I used a second go
basically has a property equivalent and we can set this equal to some code that should be executed when
this event occurs.
Now this always should be set equal to a function, can be an anonymous function like in this case here,
could also be pointing at a named function
and then this function will execute when the event occurs,
so either like this, as I said an anonymous function or we define a named function with either function
definition any way you want,
so either with the declaration or the expression approach, with the function keyword or as an arrow function,
here I'll go for an arrow function and then here we could name this on button click or button click
handler,
both are common naming conventions for naming functions that are triggered upon events, either on
click or something like that or with this handler naming here and then here, I define my function that should
be executed, button was clicked is an alert text
I want to display in that case and then here, we can go to button on click and point at
the button click handler. Don't execute it right away, instead as with the event listener, point at it
like this. If you do that and you now reload, we'll again see that alert. Now this is better than using an
attribute in our HTML code because at least now, it's in a Javascript code
and actually this is fine to use especially in smaller projects but it has one major downside,
we can only add one handler for this kind of event to this element.
So if you want to for example run two different functions upon a click, let's say we have another
function,
another button click handler and here I want to console log
this was clicked, now if I want to add both functions on this button,
we can't do button on click like this twice, well we can but you'll see that now the first function
will never run. So if I now click, I only see the console output here but I don't see the alert
and the reason for that is that I simply override the value which is stored in this property.
So this is not added or appended as a listener,
it's simply overriding the old listener.
Now of course the workaround could be to create a third function which calls these two functions but
that quickly gets cumbersome because then you have no finegrained control over when you want to use
which handler, maybe you want to remove a handler at a later point of time,
that's all pretty tricky.
So you can use this approach but it's also not recommended,
instead it is recommended that you use add event listener as we did it throughout this course because this
allows you to add multiple event listeners to the same element and you also have a remove event listener
function or method which you can use to remove an event listener, which also can be very powerful
in more complex apps, where you might have certain scenarios where under certain circumstances, you want
to remove a listener from an element and then maybe re-add it later,
that's super easy to do with add event listener and remove event listener.